gitolite: rewrite for current configuration and best practices (#307)
canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation: how-to/backups/install-gitolite.md

(install-gitolite)=
# How to install and configure gitolite

> {term}`Gitolite` provides a traditional source control management server for git, with multiple users and access rights management. 

Reviewer: suggestion:

while touching it - should https://documentation.ubuntu.com/server/reference/glossary/#term-gitolite get a back link to this page?

> It provides access so you can add remote repos in the form of `git@yourserver:some/repo/path`.

Reviewer: question - non blocking:

To me both dance around the bush of just saying what upstreams page says at the top (https://gitolite.com/gitolite/index.html) "Gitolite allows you to setup git hosting on a central server, with fine-grained access control and many more powerful features." how about quoting that for line one?

I see you wanted to make an example what that is used for.
How about this?:
'It allows access to the served repositories in the form of `git@yourserver:some/repo/path.'

## Install a gitolite server

Gitolite can be installed with the following command:

```bash

> # it will ask for a path or content of your admin ssh key - instead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# The install automation will ask for a path or content of your admin ssh key - instead
```

Reviewer: suggestion:

I furthermore struggle why we have the automatic ask when we say people should not use it.
Is it worth to add an interim statement like "... which is for very simple setups, for full control we recommend ..."

Reviewer 2: > on the one hand it makes sense taking out the comment of the command for copying, on the other it's hard to add that information to the text without interrupting the reading flow for additional information to a specific command. i think users would just copy the command and ignore the comment, so we can enhance the concrete commands with remarks directly adjacent?

They *might* use it that way, but I don't like to make that assumption. We don't usually include comments in any other code blocks, except in cases where we're providing an entire script. I can help with re-writes before merging if you want, or I can come back after we merge and do it (I don't mind which, but in general, I only leave comments in if it's really-truly necessary and justified)

> # we recommend leaving it empty and to do the manual setup below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# we recommend leaving it empty and instead follow the manual setup below.
```

sudo apt install gitolite3
```

The official documentation is at https://gitolite.com/gitolite/

## Configure gitolite

Gitolite stores its configuration in a git repository (called `gitolite-admin`), so there's no configuration in `/etc`.
This configuration repository manages all other git repos, users and their permissions.

Create a `git` user for gitolite to use for the service:

```bash
# you can adjust the git repo storage path as the home directory

> sudo useradd adduser --system --home /home/git git

Reviewer: important - question:

useradd + adduser - that seems wrong or am I missing the point?

```

To access the config repository, we now add the administrator's SSH public key.
If you have not yet configured an SSH key, refer to the section on {ref}`SSH keys in our OpenSSH guide <openssh-server>`.

```bash
# assuming you are the administrator

> # if you have an rsa key, use id_rsa.pub.

Reviewer: suggestion:

good hint, maybe we should mention that we do this to make it accessible for the subsequent setup helper?

cp ~/.ssh/id_ed25519.pub /tmp/admin.pub
```

As the `git` user, let's import the administrator's key into gitolite (it will get the `admin` username due to that filename).

```bash
sudo -i -u git gitolite setup -pk /tmp/admin.pub
```

What this creates:
- management repo in `~git/repositories/gitolite-admin.git`
- a global config in `~git/.gitolite.rc`
- `~git/projects.list` as repo overview
- `~git/.ssh/authorized_keys` with `command=` to force gitolite over `ssh`

>   - and for each user, their `ssh` public key

Reviewer: question:

I'm struggling with "for each user" as no one ever passed a list of users so far.
Does it pick up all users on the system or do we need to add a few more words here?

To try if the setup worked, try `ssh` as the user owning the admin key we just added:

```bash
# prints the gitlite repo overview
ssh git@yourserver
```
```
hello admin, this is git@your-gitolite-server running gitolite3

 R W	gitolite-admin
 R W	testing
```

## Managing gitolite users and repositories

To configure gitolite users, repositories and permissions, clone the configuration repository:

```bash
# you can use your ip-address, hostname, or if working just locally use localhost
git clone git@$yourserver:gitolite-admin.git

cd gitolite-admin
```

> To apply configuration change, **commit them** in the repo and push the changes back to the server with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To apply configuration change, **commit them** in the repo and **push the changes** back to the server with:
```

otherwise this loses the emphasis on "push it back"

    - add it to the `keydir` directory as `<desired-username>.pub`
  - To **delete a gitolite user**, just deleting their public key files
- **`conf`** : contains configuration files

  - Manage repositories in `conf/gitolite.conf`
    - Specify the the list of repositories followed by some access rules.

Have an example:

```text
# gitolite config
# users are created by their public key in keydir/$username.pub

# group creation
@bestproject          = name1 name2
@projectwatchers      = name3 @bestproject

# this repo itself
repo    gitolite-admin
        RW+     =   admin
        R       =   alice

# a repo with access to anybody
repo    testing
        RW+     = @all

# a repo with special privileges, to tags and branches
repo    some/awesome/project
        RW                      =   alice @bestproject
        RW+                     =   bob
        RW+   dev/              =   @bestproject
        R                       =   @projectwatchers carol
# bestproject members and alice can push code (but not force-push)
# bestproject members can force-push branches starting with dev/
# bob can forcepush anything
# projectwatchers and carol have readonly access
```

> For more advanced permission configuration (restricting tags, branches, ...), see:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more advanced permission configuration (restricting tags, branches, ...), please see the examples in the upstream documentation:
```

- https://gitolite.com/gitolite/conf.html
- https://gitolite.com/gitolite/conf-2.html

## Using your server

> Now you can use your gitolite server as a regular `git remote`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can use your newly set up gitolite server as a regular `git remote`.
```
